Domestic violence is defined under ARS § 13-3601 as any act that is a dangerous crime against a child or any act that involves violence against a family member or spouse if:

The victim and the alleged offender are married or have formerly been married, or they reside or have resided in the same household;
The alleged offender and the victim have a child in common;
The victim or the alleged offender is pregnant by the other party; or
The victim is related to the alleged offender or to the alleged offender’s spouse by blood, marriage or court order as a parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, brother or sister, parent-in-law, grandparent-in-law, stepparent, step-grandparent, stepchild, step-grandchild, brother-in-law or sister-in-law;
The victim is a child who resides or has resided in the same household as the alleged offender, and is related by blood to a former spouse of the alleged offender or to a person who resides or has resided in the same household as the alleged offender; and/or
The relationship between the victim and the alleged offender is currently or was previously a romantic or sexual relationship.


Domestic violence offenses can include, but are not limited to:

Abuse of a Child or Vulnerable Adult Abuse,
Aggravated Assault,
Assault,
Criminal Trespass,
Custodial Interference,
Dangerous Crimes against Children,
Disorderly Conduct,
Endangerment,
Harassment,
Interfering with Judicial Proceedings,
Kidnapping,
Manslaughter,
Murder,
Negligent Homicide,
Sexual Assault,
Stalking,
Threatening and Intimidating, and/or
Unlawful Imprisonment.
Back to top

Mesa Domestic Violence Offenses
Some of the most commonly charged domestic violence offenses in Mesa can include, but are not limited to the following:

Domestic Assault – ARS § 13-1203 – An individual can be charged with domestic assault in Arizona if they:

Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly cause physical injury to their spouse or family member;
Intentionally place their spouse or another family member in reasonable fear of immediate physical harm; or
Knowingly touch their spouse or a family member with the intent to injure, insult or provoke that person.
This offense is punishable as a class 1, 2 or 3 misdemeanor.

Aggravated Domestic Assault – ARS § 13-1204 – An individual can be charged with aggravated domestic assault if they commit domestic assault and:

They cause serious physical injury to their spouse or family member;
They use a deadly weapon;
They commit assault by any means of force that results in temporary but serious disfigurement, or loss or impairment of any body part;
They commit the offense while their spouse or family member is bound or restrained;
The commit the offense by entering another person’s home;
They are at least 18 years old and commit the offense against a person who is under 15; or
They violated the terms of a protective order.
This offense can result in a class 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 felony conviction.

Child Abuse – ARS § 13-3623 – An individual can be charged with this offense if they cause a child to suffer physical injury, cause or allow the health of a child to be injured, or cause or allow a child to be placed in a situation where they are endangered. This offense can result in a class 6, 5, 4, 3, or 2 felony conviction.

Child Endangerment – ARS § 13-1201 – An individual can be charged with this offense if they recklessly engage in conduct that causes danger to a child with a substantial risk of immediate death or physical injury. This offense is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor or a class 6 felony.

Violation of Order of Protection – ARS § 13-3602 – An individual can be charged with this offense if they violate the terms of a court-ordered protective order. A protective order, restraining order, protection order, or order of protection is a court order that prohibits various types of contact between family members and spouses. At a protective order hearing, the judge determines whether domestic violence has occurred and if it is likely to occur in the future after both parties present evidence witnesses. The judge will issue a protective order if they determine domestic violence has occurred.

Aggravated Domestic Violence – An individual can be convicted of an aggravated domestic violence offense if they commit a third or subsequent domestic violence offense within 84 months of any previous offense. Aggravated domestic violence can result in a class 5 felony conviction.